---
title: Social Studies Education Study Program Holds Public Lecture for Millennial Young Generation
author: Nurul Fauziah
date: 2019-02-12
time: 9:06:00
status: published
slug: pips-gelar-kuliah-umum
lang: en
image: panigale-v4r.jpg
---

The Social Sciences Education Study Program, FPIPS UPI, held a public lecture with the theme of Opportunities and Challenges of Social Science Education in the Era of the Millennial Young Generation in Historical and Philosophical Perspectives, at the Auditorium of FPIPS UPI, Jl. Dr. Setiabudhi. No. 229 Bandung. Friday, (12/22).

This public lecture is an annual routine activity, in order to provide a foundation for thinking for future social studies educators. The philosophical approach is an approach that measures the root meaning of the existence of the bravery of social studies itself, which is accompanied by the history of the social studies paradigm from time to time. This public lecture presented two presenters, namely Prof. Dr. Abdul Azis Wahab, M.A. and Prof. Dr. Rochiati Wiriaatmadja, M.A. with the aim of providing understanding and knowledge to UPI Social Studies Education students regarding the opportunities and challenges of becoming social studies teachers and social studies teacher candidates in the Millennial Young Generation Era in Indonesia and demanding social studies education students to think critically.

This event was attended by approximately 200 Social Studies Education students class 2017, 2016, 2015, and several batches of 2014, five (5) Social Studies Education Study Program lecturers, namely: Dr. Erlina Wiyanarti, M.Pd, Dra Yani Kusmarni, M.Pd, Mina Holilah, M.Pd, Wildan Insan Fauzi, M.Pd, Siti Nurbayani K, S.Pd, M, Si, Head of PIPS UPI Dr. H. Dadang Sundawa, M.Pd, and opened by the Dean of FPIPS Dr. Agus Mulyana, M.Hum with his remarks by emphasizing the aspect of "our (Sociology Teacher) ability is to read opportunities".

Starting the conversation by Prof Dr. Rochiati Wiriaatmadja, M.A. by explaining the definitions of Challenges, Opportunities, and Millennials. He said, the challenge is the "challenge of opportunity" the problems that must be faced, while the opportunity is the task to overcome the problems that exist in social studies learning, and Millennials are the digital generation grouped into 3 groups, generation X (1980s), generation X (1980s), generation Y (1990s), and Generation Z (2000s). The word Millennial generation was first recognized by the Hungarian sociologist, Karl Mannheim (1893-1947) In his book "_Diagnosis of Our Time_" he identified a generation after P.D. II. In the 1980s, postmodernism began to develop in Europe. In Generation X, the first complex change occurred, in Generation Y, there was a second, very complex change, which had a lot of digital/gadgets, and in Generation Z, there was a third change, namely responding to the complexity of challenges.

This change is known as post-modernism, namely the awareness of one's uniqueness to be expressed and diversity arises. In 2025, it is estimated that there will be a large population change known as the “Demographic Bonus”, i.e. the number of productive age will be greater than the number of elderly and children. This opportunity will mean a bonus, if the quality of the productive generation is high, as indicated by their education, and if the quality of education is low or zero, then this demographic bonus becomes a big burden for the Indonesian state.

This Demographic Bonus is a challenge for teachers and prospective teachers because the population of productive age affects the quality of education in Indonesia. If the Demographic Bonus for the world of education is the biggest challenge because in this era of Demographic Bonus there are generations Y and Z. Where, these 2 generations are the digital age. Children will be more fascinated by gadgets than reading books. The hours of many children are only for playing computers, cellphones, and other gadgets instead of reading books. Based on research, 43% of the Indonesian population graduated from elementary school and the reading test was carried out by 61 countries, Indonesia is ranked 60th out of 61 countries. The reading level of the Indonesian population is lower than that of Vietnam. These technological advances have both negative and positive impacts. The positive impact of advances in science and technology is that it is easy to get information and it is easy to communicate with those who are far away, but the negative impact is the increased feeling of laziness in reading books because it is easy to get information. In comparison, Indonesians read one novel per year while Americans read 12 novels per year. This can be answered by optimally existing opportunities so as to be able to align reading endurance.

The challenge for teachers is to always learn and take the time to learn, improve themselves, evaluate their weaknesses and shortcomings by improving their "professional skills", deliver value education or character education that clearly directs their behavior by telling them what is good and right, what is wrong. bad and wrong, making students able to build independent, balanced and competitive personalities.

This major change is disruptive, i.e. it describes a shock in the process of change itself "_disruption"_, which is caused by advances in science and technology and affects the socio-cultural life of the community. For teachers dan prospective teachers, this big challenge is a big opportunity for their dedication as educators to find solutions and implement them, if the biggest challenge is due to the technological gap related to the digital era, then teachers and prospective teachers must adapt immediately, because challenges to teacher performance abilities will not left behind by the students themselves. This is an opportunity for teachers to always improve their knowledge and skills.

No less important is the second presentation by Prof. Dr. Abdul Azis Wahab, M.A explained about "Digital Native". He said, gadgets are important. However, if you can't use it properly, it will become "_Garbage_" garbage. The year 2025 or 2045 is known as the "_Golden Age_" where the task of education is to prepare professional teachers who have the knowledge, skills, and commitment. Meanwhile, the task of teachers and prospective teachers is to prepare skills to face the challenges of the 21st century. To become professional teachers, Hammond and Bransford ask 3 questions: _First,_ _what kind of knowledge do effective teachers need to have about their subject matter about the learning processes and development of their students?__. Second,_ _what skills do teachers need in order to provide productive learning experiences?._ _Third,_ _what professional commitments do teachers need to help every child succeed and to continue?__._ Learning must have an interactive relationship between students and teachers. Embedding _character_ and _values_ is important, therefore it needs to be integrated in the learning process. The learning process by instilling practices that can be applied in everyday life. Project-based learning, instills a competitive spirit but must be balanced with collaboration, which means competing but also helping each other and an attitude of honesty, responsibility, and a sense of trust.

There are three things that social studies teachers must prepare, including: _learning and Innovation skills, digital literacy skills, and career and life skills_. The skills that must be developed, namely: the ability to adapt, compete, and cooperate and think globally act locally. To progress, you don't need to be Japanese, you don't need to be Korean, you don't need to be Chinese, you don't need to be an American, but go forward to be a cultured Indonesian,” he said. (**Nurul Fauziah**)