---
title: Yogyakarta Always Has a Story
author: Fini Kristiani (1808346)
date: 2019-12-16
time: 10:40:00
status: published
slug: yogyakarta-punya-cerita
lang: en
image: template.png
---

Yogyakarata, is a city that always surprises us every time we visit it. At this time, UPI Social Science Education class 2018 had the opportunity to explore knowledge in the city of Jogjakarta. We departed from our beloved campus on Wednesday, November 27, 2019 and arrived the next day, Thursday, November 28, 2019. We visited several destinations to make observations. First, we visited a tourist village located approximately 5 KM from the Jogja Return Monument. The village is a tourist village of Tanjung. Arriving there we were given a warm welcome by one of the residents of the village of Tanjung who is the manager of the tourist village. Then we were immediately directed to see one of the historic joglo houses which is no longer inhabited. It is said that the pillars of the joglo house are made of jackfruit wood which is about 200 years old. Some of the people in this Tanjung village work as farmers. The environment is still beautiful and the people who still preserve traditional arts are the main attraction for this Tanjung Village. Not only that, we were also treated to a special traditional food called sagon, a sweet snack made from coconut and white glutinous rice, besides that we were also taught some of their traditional dances.

The second destination we visited after the village of Tanjung was the Lava tour of Merapi. A major eruption in 2010 has razed the settlements at the foot of Mount Merapi into a sea of ​​sand and rock. We had an adventure exploring the remnants of the Merapi eruption by using a jeep. It was a very pleasant and thrilling experience when we walked around the cobbled streets and saw the remnants of the residential areas which were now razed to the ground. After we walked around, we arrived at the bunker, the times were cool. This cool Kali bunker is right under Merapi, and is a silent witness to the deaths of two volunteers who took refuge in the bunker during the Merapi eruption. Before we got on the bus to continue our journey, we were taken around one of the rocky rivers which are lava flows. Through the flow of water using a jeep causes a different sensation and of course very exciting.

It's incomplete if you go to Jogja without seeing its romantic beaches. From the Merapi lava tour we went to one of the beaches located in the south of the city of Jogja. Yes, Parangtritis beach was the closing destination on our first day in Jogja. Who is not hypnotized by the beauty of the sunset that is served by the most famous beach in Jogja. The waves, the breezy wind shrouded in orange light against the backdrop of the stretching ocean made us amazed at how beautiful God's creation is. The atmosphere seemed to bring us closer to each other and it didn't feel like time went so fast when we were together. It was getting dark and we had to continue our journey to a place where we could rest after enjoying the beauty and sweetness of Jogjakarta. Tired indeed, but we don't seem to be running out of energy. There's always a place in Jogja waiting for us to explore even if it's late at night. Malioboro, which is decorated with lights and boisterous greetings from its merchants, seems to add to the warmth of Jogja at night. There are sweet memories left on the surrounding benches and there is warmth that whispers through the tunes sung by street musicians, making us not want to leave this city.

Friday 29 November 2019, today is our second day in Jogjakarta. Even though we still want to lay down, our enthusiasm for adventure and seeking knowledge in this gudeg city overcomes our tiredness. After we checked out from the hotel where we were staying, we continued our journey to the next destination, namely the Yogyakarta Palace. The Jogjakarta Palace is the official palace of the Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat Sultanate which is located in the city of Jogjakarta. Not only as a tourist spot, this palace is the residence of Sri Sultan Hamengkubuwono I to Sri Sultan Hamengkubuwono X as the king who reigns now. When we arrived at the Keraton we were immediately greeted with a Javanese song that played solemnly even without the sound of gamelan. It's not just Javanese songs, but it's history that is played, there is no gamelan sound because that day is Friday, which is when gamelan is played on Friday because it is out of respect for the Friday prayer which is held at the Grand Mosque of Kauman. The palace not only stores historical antiques, the palace is also rich in traditions and cultural rituals that add to the uniqueness of the city of Jogja. No less interesting, on the other side of the palace there is a square that is so wide shaded by two banyan trees which are famous for their mystical stories.

From the palace, we went to the great Kauman mosque which was located not far from the palace. This mosque is the grand mosque of the Sultanate of Jogjakarta or the Great Mosque of Jogjakarta. The location of this mosque is to the west of the North Square complex of the Jogjakarta Palace. It was built by Sri Sultan Hamengkubuwono I with Kyai Faqih Ibrahim Diponingrat who was the first head of the Keraton and Kyai Wiryokusumo as the architect. This mosque was built on Sunday Wage 29 May 1773. When we entered the gate of the mosque our eyes were drawn to the porch of the mosque which is quite spacious and magnificent. The building from the porch of the mosque is made higher with the main yard and on the side of the mosque there are small pools which he said in ancient times the pool was used to wash the feet of people who would enter the mosque. Inside the mosque, there are 2 gold-plated pulpits where the Sultan performs his worship and delivers his sermon. However, because it is rarely used now, worshipers who perform worship at this mosque are allowed to fill the shaff used by the sultan while it is still empty. The Great Mosque of Kauman is supported by pillars and in the main room there are several core pillars which are larger than the other pillars. It is said that if someone manages to hug one of these core pillars, then that person has an advantage. From the Gedhe Kauman mosque, we started in groups to carry out research according to a predetermined theme around the area of ​​the Gedhe mosque. Among them are Kauman Village, Ketandan Village, and Beringharjo Market.

Our visit to several places such as Kampung Kauman, Ketandan, and Beringharjo market to conduct research concludes our adventure to explore knowledge in Jogjakarta this time. The journey was indeed tiring, but the feeling of tiredness seemed nothing compared to the warm experience and valuable knowledge we got in this city. Togetherness and cohesiveness are very valuable gifts that we get from this trip, it seems that it will not be easy for us to erase them from memory. Jogjakarta, thank you for adding many new colors to our journey in exploring knowledge and togetherness. Yogyakarta always has a story.

Social Studies 2018

Together We Make It Forever

by. Christian Fini (1808346)

Ed. Mina Holilah, M.Pd.